<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Endnotes</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="backmatter">
		<section id="endnotes" epub:type="endnotes">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Endnotes</h2>
			<ol>
				<li id="note-1" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The reader will kindly turn back to <a href="chapter-1.xhtml">the start of the chapter</a>, and observe the date at the head of this lecture. At that time I was engaged against a system of English teaching which I believed to be thoroughly bad. That system has since given place to another, which I am prepared to defend as a better. <a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Do you remember, by the by, Samuel Rogers’s lines on Lady Jane Grey? They have always seemed to me very beautiful:</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Like her most gentle, most unfortunate,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Crown’d but to die⁠—who in her chamber sate</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Musing with Plato, though the horn was blown,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And every ear and every heart was won,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And all in green array were chasing down the sun!</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-2" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-3" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">The Odyssey</i>, Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>, lines 81⁠–⁠86. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-3" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-4" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The reference given is <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Zeitschr. f. Ethnologie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIX</span> 30 <abbr>ff.</abbr> <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-4" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-5" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Why had he to swear this under pain of excommunication, when the lecturer could so easily keep a roll-call? But the amount of oathtaking in a medieval university was prodigious. Even college servants were put on oath for their duties: Gyps invited their own damnation, bed-makers kissed the book. Abroad, where examinations were held, the Examiner swore not to take a bribe, the Candidate neither to give one, nor, if unsuccessful, to take his vengeance on the Examiner with a knife or other sharp instrument. At New College, Oxford, the matriculating undergraduate was required to swear in particular not to dance in the College Chapel. <a href="chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-5" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-6" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Donne’s “Sermon <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> preached at Pauls upon Christmas Day, in the Evening.” 1624. <a href="chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-6" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Works of Lucian of Samosata</i>: translated by <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H. W.</abbr> Fowler and <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F. G.</abbr> Fowler (Introduction, <abbr>p.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxix</span>). Oxford, Clarendon Press. <a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-8" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Training of the Imagination</i>: by James<br/>
					Rhoades. London, John Lane, 1900. <a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-8" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-9" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Landor: <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Aesop and Rhodopè</i>. <a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-9" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-10" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Cornwall. <cite>—⁠Editor</cite> <a href="chapter-8.xhtml#noteref-10" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-11" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>I borrow the verse and in part the prose of Professor <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Rhys Roberts’ translation. <a href="chapter-9.xhtml#noteref-11" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-12" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>It is fair to say that Myers cancelled the Damascus stanza in his final edition. <a href="chapter-10.xhtml#noteref-12" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-13" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Charles Reade notes this in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Cloister and the Hearth</i>, chapter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">LXI</span>. <a href="chapter-11.xhtml#noteref-13" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-14" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The loose and tautologous style of this Preface is worth noting. Likely enough Browne wrote it in a passion that deprived him of his habitual self-command. One phrase alone reveals the true Browne⁠—that is, Browne true to himself: “and time that brings other things to light, should have satisfied me in the remedy of its oblivion. <a href="chapter-11.xhtml#noteref-14" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-15" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote>
						<p>Well!⁠ ⁠… my education is at last finished: indeed it would be strange, if, after five years’ hard application, anything were left incomplete. Happily that is all over now; and I have nothing to do, but to exercise my various accomplishments.</p>
						<p>Let me see!⁠—as to French, I am mistress of that, and speak it, if possible, with more fluency than English. Italian I can read with ease, and pronounce very well: as well at least, and better, than any of my friends; and that is all one need wish for in Italian. Music I have learned till I am perfectly sick of it. But⁠ ⁠… it will be delightful to play when we have company. I must still continue to practise a little;⁠—the only thing, I think, that I need now to improve myself in. And then there are my Italian songs! which everybody allows I sing with taste, and as it is what so few people can pretend to, I am particularly glad that I can.</p>
						<p>My drawings are universally admired; especially the shells and flowers; which are beautiful, certainly; besides this, I have a decided taste in all kinds of fancy ornaments.</p>
						<p>And then my dancing and waltzing! in which our master himself owned that he could take me no further! just the figure for it certainly; it would be unpardonable if I did not excel.</p>
						<p>As to common things, geography, and history, and poetry, and philosophy, thank my stars, I have got through them all! so that I may consider myself not only perfectly accomplished, but also thoroughly well-informed.</p>
						<p>Well, to be sure, how much have I fagged through⁠—; the only wonder is that one head can contain it all.</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>I found this in a little book <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Thoughts of Divines and Philosophers</i>, selected by Basil Montagu. The quotation is signed “<abbr epub:type="z3998:personal-name">J. T.</abbr>” I cannot trace it, but suspect Jane Taylor. <a href="chapter-12.xhtml#noteref-15" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-16" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Samuel Daniel, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Epistle to the Lady Margaret, Countess of Cumberland</i>. <a href="chapter-12.xhtml#noteref-16" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
			</ol>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
